                MVS TOOLS AND TRICKS OF THE TRADE
                         FEBRUARY 2008

                                      Sam Golob
                                      MVS Systems Programmer
                                      P.O. Box 906
                                      Tallman, New York 10982

Sam Golob is a Senior Systems Programmer.  He also
participates in library tours and book signings with his
wife, author Courtney Taylor. Sam can be contacted at
sbgolob@cbttape.org and/or sbgolob@attglobal.net.

CBT Tape Recent Developments - Part 1

      Every once in a while, we devote an installment or two of this
column to displaying some of the newer contributions to the CBT Tape MVS
Utilities collection, which have been either submitted recently, or have
been considerably enhanced lately.  The CBT Tape collection can be found
at www.cbttape.org, and you don't need to be a member of anything, or to
know a password, to get any of the thousands of software tools, large or
small, which are posted there.  I've just looked at the title index for
this column, and I see that for several years now, I haven't written an
article of this type here.  So here goes an attempt at a half-decent
summary of as much of the new stuff as I can fit into this space.

      The last column of this type was written in June of 2004, and
after looking, I've discovered that over 380 changes have been made to
the collection since then.  So even though I surely can't do justice to
a complete description of all those updates, I guess I can try to hit
the highlights by describing a few of them.

      As of this writing, the newest changed files in the website at
www.cbttape.org are still in the UPDATES page, and not in the CBT page.
Therefore, if you want to see the newest CBT files, please go to the
UPDATES page at the www.cbttape.org website.  In general, I'd always
recommend going to the UPDATES page for any file you might be interested
in, and only afterwards, if that file number isn't in UPDATES, only THEN
go to the CBT page and look there.

      Even though the CBT Tape collection exists (primarily) as a
website, the collection still resides on real tapes.  The last actual
tape that was cut, was Version 475, cut on Dec.  20, 2007.  All file
updates since Version 471, created on Feb. 28, 2006, are found (as of
this writing) on the UPDATES PAGE ONLY, at www.cbttape.org.


THE PDS TSO COMMAND, ETC.

      One of the highlights of the CBT Tape collection has always been
the (practically indispensable for those who use it) PDS TSO command
tool, whose source is found on File 182 of the CBT Tape.  The PDS
command manipulates datasets, particularly partitioned datasets or
pds'es, hence its name.  The PDS command tool can do several thousand
different functions, literally, and is a great time saver for those who
know how to use it.  Since its original authors, mainly Bruce Leland and
Steve Smith, made a commercial product out of PDS back in 1989 (it is
now called Startool FDM (TM), and distributed by Serena Software), John
Kalinich has continued to enhance the free version of PDS, still on the
CBT Tape collection on File 182, for everyone to keep enjoying for free.

      Every few months, John sends me a refresh of the PDS command
source, which he has kept working on, even as we write.  The main
enhancement of PDS since 2004 has been (almost complete) support for
PDSE's (extended PDS'es), which was added by John, with much help from
Greg Price, whose REVIEW file browsing program (to be discussed next)
from CBT File 134, has long supported PDSE's.  Versions of the PDS
command which support PDSE's are called PDS 8.6, as opposed to PDS 8.5,
which does not support PDSE's.  The current level of the PDS command
package, as of the time of this writing, is PDS 8.6.08.

      John has supplied (in the $$$MODS member of CBT File 182) a list
of new subcommands that have been added to the free PDS command package.
These are:

   1. MXIBAT: DISPLAY (in the PDS log) MVS EXTENDED INFORMATION
      CULLED FROM THE MXI PACKAGE (CBT Tape Files 409 and 410) if
      MXI is installed on your system.
   2. SRCHFOR: SEARCH MEMBERS WITH ISPF SEARCH-FOR PROGRAM
   3. DISASM: DISASSEMBLE LOAD MODULE
   4. DLINK: RECONSTRUCT OBJECT CODE FOR A LOAD MODULE
   5. XMIT: XMIT MEMBERS WITH TSO TRANSMIT
   6. OFFLOAD: OFFLOAD MEMBERS TO A SEQUENTIAL FILE
   7. SMPGEN: CREATE SMP/E CONTROLS FOR MEMBERS
   8. LMA: LIST DEBUG TOOL LOAD MODULE ANALYSIS INFO (if IBM's
      LMA is installed)
   9. CPKMAP: VOLUME TRACK MAP WITH COMPAKTOR (if FDR products
      (commercial) are installed)

Many additional changes to PDS 8.6.xx have also been documented in the
$$$MODS member of File 182.

      Since many additional (free) TSO commands and programs are
necessary to be present in your TSO environment for some of the
subcommands of PDS to work properly, these have now been packaged in
File 182 as an XMIT'ed load library, in member UTILXMIT.  Therefore, you
don't have to separately install all of these programs from their
various source files on the CBT Tape.  Instead, you just have to TSO
RECEIVE the UTILXMIT member of File 182, and you have a load library of
all the necessary commands, to copy into your load library that makes
all those commands accessible to your TSO session.

ENHANCEMENTS TO REVIEW (CBT FILE 134)

      Bill Godfrey wrote the first version of the REVIEW TSO command in
1980, as a general purpose file browser.  Starting in 1983 and
unbeknownst to us until 1989 (because he lives in Australia and there
was no Internet then), Greg Price started enhancing the REVIEW command
and adding features.  Greg has never stopped doing that.  Today REVIEW
has grown from 4,000-odd lines of code to (now) well over 50,000 lines
of code.

      Using the REVIEW command, you can now look at (browse) just about
any kind of MVS file that exists, including VSAM and HFS files.  And now
there's a file EDITOR too, that looks like, and very much is used like,
the ISPF editor.  But REVIEW (and its editor) can be used in RAW TSO,
without ISPF being present.  As a browser, if ISPF is present, REVIEW
uses the available ISPF windows.  If ISPF is not present, REVIEW uses
the full screen under TSO.

      One of the nicer uses for the REVIEW command is to look at SMF
records in an SMF file, either the primary or secondary file on disk, in
real time, or at one of the backup SMF files, either on disk or on tape.
REVIEW has a very unique ability to find all the SMF records you are
looking for, in an SMF file, and to format them for you, to show you
what they mean.  If you're REVIEWing an SMF file (containing SMF
records) and you want to format the records as you're seeing them, just
type the word SMF on the command line, and you'll see a lot of
information about what the records really mean.  To find a given record
type, just enter the FS nn primary command, where nn is a record type.
You'll find the first record of that type, like FS 21, which finds the
next Type 21 SMF record.  FS 21 ALL will find ALL of the Type 21 records
in the file, starting from the position (in the file) where you
currently are.

      As of this writing, the REVIEW command is at level 41.0.  If you
really want to know the principal changes that have occurred in REVIEW
since mid-2004 levels 38.x and 39.0, please refer to the REVNOTES member
of File 134 at the bottom of the member.  I don't have space to include
all of the level 41.0 changes, but the REVEDIT (the REVIEW editor)
changes should be of interest to all of you.  They are as follows:

   R41.0 enhancements to REVEDIT include:
   - add TF and TS line commands.
   - add SORT primary command.
   - add CREATE and REPLACE primary commands.
   - colon command prefix applies command to current line. eg.
     :TS
   - support ASM highlighting of source code in a jobstream.

      So you see that the REVIEW EDITOR (invoked by an UPDATE subcommand
in REVIEW) is now becoming more and more ISPF- like.  Remember that you
can do file editing with REVIEW even under RAW TSO, with no ISPF present
at all.  So REVIEW is a fine recovery tool to have, when ISPF won't come
up.  Load modules for the REVIEW command, and all the subprograms and
aliases it uses (including HEL and FSH - fullscreen scrollable TSO
HELP), can be found in the load library on CBT File 135.  So
installation of REVIEW can be supremely easy.  Just copy the correct
load modules from File 135 and make them accessible to your TSO session.
See File 134, member REVINST, for further help in installing REVIEW.

LIONEL DYCK'S STUFF, AND MORE

      Lionel Dyck has quietly accumulated a large collection of very
useful tools, in CBT Tape Files 312, 313, and 314.  Lionel is an old MVS
hand, and he has made many contributions to the field of MVS sysprogging
for a long time.  Since Lionel's contributions to the CBT Tape are so
many, I had to break them into three files, with the member names in
alphabetical order.  Lionel's personal website is www.lbdsoftware.com,
but his stuff is also on Files 312 thru 314 on the CBT Tape, and Lionel
tries to keep the CBT Tape collection current, with his latest updates.

      Probably the best-known of Lionel's many applications is XMITIP, a
system of sending emails from an SMTP session on your MVS machine.  This
is no ordinary simple email application.  There are extremely many bells
and whistles found in XMITIP, where you can change or format practically
anything you want to put into an email.  There is even an XMITIP news
group on www.yahoogroups.com which is a forum for XMITIP enhancement
suggestions and questions.  XMITIP is found on CBT File 314, because it
begins with an X, at the end of the alphabet.

      Another of Lionel's famous applications, is FTPB, an ISPF dialog
which makes it easy to send FTP transmissions in either the foreground
or as JCL, to make a batch job.  FTPB is found on File 312.  Another
File 312 gem, which I use all the time, is LSTPROC, a small REXX
application which reads your JES2 PROCLIB list, allocates the PROC files
in SHR mode, and invokes ISRDDN to display the PROCLIB concatenations.
This is very simple to use, and it beats all the alternatives.

      A third small application that is very useful, is Lionel's PARMLIB
checker, called PRMCK.  This is a REXX that checks the syntax of PARMLIB
members, and is therefore very useful.  I don't have more space to
elaborate here, but I suggest that you download Files 312, 313, and 314
from the UPDATES page of www.cbttape.org, and see Lionel's gems for
yourself.

TO BE CONTINUED

      Today, I could only hit some of the bigger packages and their high
points.  To do any justice to the CBT Tape files and how they have
changed in the recent past, you'll have to go to www.cbttape.org and
look at the UPDATES page to see for yourselves.  Nevertheless, I hope to
continue on this topic next month, and talk about some of the newer
packages on the CBT Tape collection which are very innovative and novel.

      I wish all of you the best of everything, and I hope to see you
here again, next month.

